Short instructions to setup a Lubuntu Virtual Machine with
R & RStudio:

1. Download these: 
http://lubuntu.net/ (desktop cd)
https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads (Oracle VM VirtualBox)

2. Install Oracle VM VirtualBox, open it, click 'New' button, at 
'Name' put Lubuntu, click 'Next' change memory size to 512 MB (or 
more, but as a rule of thumb not more than a quarter of your total 
RAM), Click 'Next', select 'create virtual drive now', click 'Next',
select 'VDI', click 'Next', select 'Fixed size', 
click 'Next', set disk size to 8GB, click 'Create'. Feel
free to make those values larger if you like. If you can't 
set it to 8GB, set it as large as you can.

3. At the main Oracle VM VirtualBox window, double-click on 
'Lubuntu' the VM you just set up. You will then get a little
window that asks you to 'select start-up disk', click on the
little folder icon to the right of the drop-down field, then
find where you downloaded the lubuntu desktop cd. It should
be a file that ends in iso and is about 700 MB. Once you've 
selected that file, click 'start' on the 'select start-up disk'
window. 

4. You will then be taken to the Lubuntu install menu, 
choose 'English' by pressing enter, then on the next
screen 'Install Lubuntu' (use the arrow keys to select, 
then press enter). Look in the lower right corner of the
window to see what button you need to press to free the
mouse (for me it's the right control key). It will take 
a few minutes to install, keep an eye on it, you will 
need to click 'continue', then 'download updates while
installing', then 'continue' again, then 'erase disk 
and install Lubuntu', then 'continue', then edit your location
then 'continue', then 'continue again (the keyboard
layout is usually fine), then type your name and password,
keep it easy and simple as this is a very low security
use (we're not using this for online banking!) and 
you'll be typing the password often. Select 'log in
automatically' then click 'continue'. Then wait a few
minutes and watch the 'copying files' progress bar.
Once that's done, it will probably want to restart,
click to accept a restart (you may have to hit enter 
a few times to move the process along), or if you 
don't get the option, click on the
little circular shutdown icon in the lower right
corner of the window, and choose 'reboot', and wait
for it to restart (hitting enter a few times if
it looks like it's stopped doing things).

5. Now open a terminal emulator window, which you 
can do by clicking on the blue button in the lower
left corner, then click on 'Accessories' then click
on 'LXTerminal'. Or you can press CTRL-ALT-t

6. At the terminal prompt, type these, one line
at a time, exactly as printed here, and press 
enter after each line (you will be prompted to 
type your password, note that you wont see 
anything on screen when you type in 
your password, no dots or asterixes - this is
normal). Once you've typed your password, press
enter. Here are the lines to type in:

  sudo apt-get update
  sudo apt-get install virtualbox-guest-x11 -y

Wait for things to scroll past in the console,
it will take a few minutes. When you get your
prompt back (ie stuff stops scrolling by and 
the console is ready for a new command), restart 
your VM by clicking on the little circular 
shutdown icon in the lower right corner of 
the window, and choosing 'reboot' or you can 
type this at the terminal:

  sudo reboot

Once you're going again, look to the menu 
bar at the top of the Oracle VM VirtualBox 
window that you're working in, click on 'Devices', 
then 'Shared clipboard', and set 
'Shared Clipboard' to bidirectional. 
Now you can copy and paste text to and from 
your VM.

Go back to the 'Devices' menu you were just at
and click on 'Shared folder settings...' then 
click on 'Machine Folders', then click on the
little button that is a picture of a folder
with a plus sign, that will make a little box
appear. In this box, click on the little down 
arrow at the right of the 'Folder Path' field,
then click on 'Other...' and choose a folder 
on your computer that contains files you want 
to work with in your VM. Check the boxes for 
'auto-mount' and 'make permanent', then click
OK, and click OK again. In your VM, open a terminal
and type:

sudo usermod -aG vboxsf MYUSERNAME

Where MYUSERNAME is the username you set up for
yourself when you made the VM. Enter your password
when prompted, then reboot the VM again. This will
give you access to the folder on your computer
from the VM, so you can easily transfer files between
the two environments. The shared folder can be 
found on the VM in a directory called 'media',
which you can access by typing /media in the 
file manager address bar. 
  
7. Open a terminal and run these three lines 
(you can now copy and paste, so do that):

  wget https://gist.githubusercontent.com/benmarwick/11204658/raw/install_things.sh
  chmod +x install_things.sh
  ./install_things.sh

then press enter and wait, watching things 
scroll by. This step downloads a small script
from github and runs it. The script installs
R, RStudio, and a bunch of other things.
This will take 30+ mins, the exact time 
depends on the speed of your internet 
connection. Keep an eye on it, you'll 
need to enter your password here and 
there, and press enter once or twice. If 
know what you're doing you can edit the script
to add or subtract items. But as it is will be
fine for most purposes. 

8. Now you're ready to compute! If you've
never used linux or the terminal before,
do check out the video lessons at:
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLA86D04D6E0BFD2E0
and the text at:
http://software-carpentry.org/v5/novice/shell/index.html
Here are a few tips to get started:

  sudo firefox # opens a web browser
  sudo rstudio # opens rstudio
  sudo gedit # opens a text editor
  sudo abiword # opens a word processor
  sudo gnumeric # opens a spreadsheet
